Document 342 of 566

My Duty to Patients Includes Offering Second-Trimester Abortions: [Op-Ed]: [Op-Ed]

https://www.proquest.com/newspapers/my-duty-patients-includes-offering-second/docview/2660238630/se-2?accountid=14026

Abstract: None available.

Full text: For almost a decade as a family doctor in California, I have provided first-trimester abortions and trained family medicine residents to do the same.
My colleagues and I believe that offering competent, compassionate abortion care is a core aspect of reproductive health, and an important part of caring for families and communities. It is gratifying work, knowing I'm helping people choose the life path that makes the most sense for them. And I have been comfortable doing that work in a cultural environment that largely celebrates what I do as an act of feminist activism.
But as the abortion rights landscape in America has grown more dire in recent months -- with numerous states moving to ban most abortions, and Roe v. Wade likely to be overturned by the Supreme Court this summer -- I wanted to do more. So I traveled to abortion clinics in Oklahoma and Kansas earlier this year to learn to perform second-trimester procedures.
My family and I will soon be moving to a part of the country where there are many fewer abortion providers than in California, but where abortion is expected to remain legal in a post-Roe America. The state I'm moving to, like all states with decent abortion access, most likely will see an influx of patients after the coming Supreme Court ruling. And an increasing share of those patients are likely to need second-trimester abortions.
I didn't pursue this training in the past because the work is physically and emotionally taxing, and the procedures are higher risk. I have always practiced medicine in places with plenty of abortion providers, so I was able to opt out. But as I watch abortion rights disintegrate, I feel I no longer have that luxury.
When I walked into the Trust Women clinic in Oklahoma City on the first day of my training, I felt a little scared. We get anti-abortion protesters outside my clinic in California, but the environment in Oklahoma feels more intense. There's a truck parked outside that's plastered with graphic images of fetuses, analogizing abortion providers to ISIS fighters. During my clinic tour, I'm shown the emergency exit "in case something crazy goes down" -- code for anti-abortion violence.
You have to be dedicated to work at an abortion clinic anywhere, but those on the Trust Women staff are among the most dedicated I've met. They're up against some of the most restrictive laws in the country, laws that disproportionately affect poor people and people of color; the governor just signed a Texas-style ban on most abortions this week.
When I was there, the clinic's patients had more than doubled since Texas' S.B. 8 went into effect, outlawing abortion in that state after six weeks of pregnancy, before many women know they're pregnant. The clinic was getting about 500 calls a day, with only a few people available to answer the phone.
Despite these hardships, the clinic is as welcoming as any I've seen. Smiles are detected everywhere, even behind masks. Posters on the wall say, "You can cry here."
As of recently, some 90 percent of abortions in America occurred in the first trimester, but that number seems likely to change as states restrict abortions and it takes people longer to get their procedures. In this way, would-be first-trimester procedures that are outlawed in one state become second-trimester procedures in another.
The vast majority of abortions that I perform in my California practice are at six, seven or eight weeks of pregnancy -- a period during which the gestational sac, a tiny piece of tissue that resembles a cotton ball, is about the size of a coin. While California has its own issues with health equity, my patients are largely able to get access to care so early because California has a large number of abortion clinics that are easy to get to. And, unlike in many states, including Oklahoma, it has a medical insurance structure that covers the cost of abortion.
In Oklahoma, the patients I saw were often one to two months further along than my patients in California typically are. They'd driven five hours, sometimes 10, to visit the clinic. They had sometimes been to crisis pregnancy centers that may have intentionally misled them with false information about abortion or given them inaccurate pregnancy dating. They often spent weeks arranging child care, getting time off work, raising funds, finding a place to stay, arranging rides.
I asked the Trust Women staff members where they send patients whose procedures can't be done in the clinic. I was thinking about patients with complicated surgical histories, or those who want general anesthesia. They smiled wearily at my naïveté. There is nowhere else, they said.
"Nobody likes doing this," a mentor said to me the first time I witnessed a second-trimester abortion as a medical student, more than a decade ago. As we were examining the pregnancy that we had just removed from the patient, my mentor went on to explain that we do this work because people need us, and we do it because it's the right thing to do.
Many second-trimester abortion providers I know balance ambiguity and a sense of responsibility: The work is sometimes hard and complicated, and it is our duty to provide the care those patients need.
Those who are staunchly opposed to abortion value the life of the fetus more than the autonomy of the pregnant person. For me, the autonomy of the pregnant person is more urgent. I have been pregnant three times, and am the mother of three children whom I adore, so I understand the physical, emotional and financial toll of childbearing. The thought of being forced to an unwanted pregnancy is horrifying. The idea of giving birth to a child and having to make the decision to parent a child I do not want or give that child up for adoption is heart-rending.
Abortions, especially second-trimester ones, can be emotional and complex. But for me, condemning a person to an unwanted pregnancy is worse.
When I train my family medicine residents in abortion care, we review different scenarios for why patients might be getting an abortion: because they're too old or too young to have a child, because they were raped, because they have professional ambitions that don't include child-rearing, because they can't afford another child, because they have too many children, because they don't want any children, because their fetus has anomalies. It's important to go through these scenarios so residents can clarify their values and examine their biases.
But after 10 years of doing this work, I've come to realize that it is not my place, or anyone else's, to require a justification for why someone is choosing to end a pregnancy. When I was a resident, I would admit heart attack patients to the hospital. Some had faulty genes. Others had poorly controlled diabetes or hypertension. Others had used methamphetamine. It was not my job to adjudicate based on life circumstance who was deserving of medical treatment. It was, and is, my professional and ethical obligation to treat the people in front of me for no other reason than that they need help and I can help them.
Ultimately every possible reason for seeking an abortion collapses into one: They don't want to carry this pregnancy to term. They don't want to give birth to a baby. That's enough for me. If we're going to say we trust people to make decisions about their bodily autonomy, we have to trust them completely.
"Is it OK to be sad?" one of the Oklahoma patients I see asks as soon as her second-trimester procedure is over. "Of course it's OK to be sad," the staff and I tell her. "You're allowed to feel whatever you're feeling."
Later on, I go for a walk along the Oklahoma River. The sky is the bright cornflower blue of spring, but the leafless trees and dry dull grass are still holding on tenaciously to winter. I look up at the trees, and their spread-out branches remind me of human anatomy, the arteries splitting into arterioles and capillaries, branching into ever finer points.
The natural world has all sorts of these redundancies, where life echoes life. I feel a deep wonder at the beauty of the natural world, and the complexities of the human experience within it. And I feel gratitude that, at least for now, I can continue to provide.
Dr. Alison Block is a family physician, an abortion provider and the executive producer of the podcast "The Nocturnists." She is working on her first novel, about a red-state abortion provider.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .
(PHOTOGRAPH BY Nick Oxford for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

____________________________________________________________