Document 369 of 566

Stop Delaying a Vaccine For the Youngest Kids: [Op-Ed]: [Op-Ed]

https://www.proquest.com/newspapers/stop-delaying-vaccine-youngest-kids-op-ed/docview/2657625515/se-2?accountid=14026

Abstract: None available.

Full text: April 28, 2022: This article has been updated to include information about Moderna's filing for emergency use authorization for its under-5 Covid vaccine.
Seventeen months after a Covid vaccine was first authorized for American adults, parents are still waiting for the government to authorize one for children under 5. Some frustrations and setbacks may have been unavoidable, but some seem due to officials making unjustified assumptions about the public and relying on overly narrow and even outdated measures of vaccine benefits.
Less than two weeks after Pfizer announced on Feb. 1 that it would begin seeking authorization to administer two doses of a vaccine for children under 5, the Food and Drug Administration said the consideration would be delayed "to allow more time to evaluate data," given the emergence of the Omicron variant. Pfizer has said it will continue its trials, evaluating the efficacy of a third dose.
Then, last week, Moderna reported that it would soon file for emergency authorization for its vaccine for children under 5 years old. A day later, that possibility, too, seemed dashed when Politico reported that the F.D.A. might delay the Moderna authorization until early summer, when Pfizer is expected to complete the third-dose trials. (Moderna has now filed for emergency authorization for its vaccine.)
The Politico report said F.D.A. officials were worried "that authorizing a single vaccine and then, soon thereafter, another one might make it harder for the administration to promote the shots and undermine confidence in their effectiveness." It would be, they say, "simpler and less confusing to simultaneously authorize and promote two vaccines to the public, rather than greenlighting one on a faster timetable and the other down the road."
This would not be the first time in the pandemic that unwarranted assumptions about human behavior have obstructed an effective response to Covid. Many immunologists told me that even the government's immunological rationale for delaying the Pfizer vaccine was lacking.
Let's start with the government's approach to public guidance. Early in the pandemic, many public health officials and physicians suggested that wearing masks would cause people to neglect other safety measures, like hand washing, by giving them a false sense of security. That notion of a false sense of security had been debunked repeatedly before, including when it was cited as a reason to oppose seatbelts in cars.
But that idea still influenced masking policy. Throughout 2020, I had heated arguments with medical doctors who held key positions in the World Health Organization, trying to convince them that these assertions had no empirical basis. Later research confirmed that people who wanted to be safe do what they can to be safe. People who wore masks were the kind of people who follow safety guidelines.
Later, the F.D.A. was slow to authorize rapid Covid tests without a prescription because, they argued, since the tests don't catch every single infection, people would need a clinician to interpret the results. This kept millions of Americans from using the tests to find out that they were infected and contagious.
Last May, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention dropped indoor mask requirements for vaccinated people. Officials argued that this would give unvaccinated people an incentive to get vaccinated. Sociological indicators at the time suggested that the unvaccinated would simply ditch their masks, too, rather than somehow get motivated, suddenly, to follow the recommendations. We know how that one went.
The C.D.C. did not, until fairly recently, recommend the higher-quality N95 or KN95 masks. We learned that was at least partly because they were considered uncomfortable and officials thought people would be less likely to wear any mask if those were recommended. While I find many such masks very comfortable, even if they weren't, aren't people entitled to know how to best protect themselves? And wouldn't those who found those masks uncomfortable simply stick with the masks they had been using?
So why would rolling out vaccines one at a time dissuade people from getting their children vaccinated? Parents who are eager to vaccinate their children are going to be eager as soon as vaccines are available. What kind of a message does delaying the rollout of a vaccine send to parents who are not eager about vaccinating their children? Could vaccination really be that important if officials delay the vaccine's availability in this manner?
It is possible to undermine vaccine confidence by, say, rolling out vaccines without releasing the supporting data. But we do have the data to show they are beneficial to children under 5.
Early in the pandemic, officials decided that no vaccine would be authorized for emergency use unless it could be shown to prevent infections with symptoms in at least 50 percent of recipients. That standard made sense early in the development of vaccines because symptoms, rather than severe illness or death, are far more common, which makes it statistically easier to figure out in trials if vaccines are making the difference between the vaccine and placebo groups. The 50 percent efficacy figure seems to have been derived from previous benchmarks for flu vaccines, and it was also adopted by the W.H.O.
Using that benchmark against infection as the key criterion for vaccine authorization makes less sense now, as new variants of the coronavirus have emerged. While vaccines have continued to provide excellent protection against severe or fatal illness, and additionally reduce incidence of many long-term complications from Covid, Omicron causes more breakthroughs. Vaccines are less protective against symptomatic infection by the Omicron variant for all age groups, often lower than the initial 50 percent benchmark, especially after a few months and without a booster. However, we still tell everyone to get vaccinated, because the vaccines are clearly still highly beneficial.
Pfizer had reported in December that for some age groups under 5, its vaccine reduced rates of symptomatic infection by less than 50 percent. Was authorization of the under-5 vaccine delayed because officials didn't update benchmarks to reflect current conditions and knowledge? Hopefully public health officials can clarify.
Pfizer hopes a third dose will enable it to meet the current targets. Meanwhile, the nearly 20 million American children under 5 have been denied a vaccine that could help prevent them from getting seriously ill.
Dr. Michael Z. Lin, a professor of neurobiology at Stanford, told me that clear observation and sensible rules were important but only if they made sense when considering the science behind them. "If we only relied on empirical observations and never developed theories to act on," Lin said, "we'd still be in the Middle Ages trying to turn lead into gold."
More than two years into the pandemic, the F.D.A. can put more reliance on markers besides symptomatic infection, such as how well a vaccine gets the immune system to form antibodies and protects other age groups, especially from severe outcomes. Based on the totality of such data, the agency could have authorized a two-dose regimen of the Pfizer vaccine for children under age 5 during the Omicron wave. It could then have waited for the data to decide whether to recommend a third dose -- adults got their third dose added later, too. It could also have explained the available data to parents and let them know that the vaccine provided a great benefit to their children even if it provided lesser protection against lesser symptoms.
As Deepta Bhattacharya, an immunologist at the University of Arizona, explained to me, a singular measure doesn't capture all the benefits of vaccination. Vaccines train the immune system to recognize and more quickly respond to a virus, giving it a head start that he notes can "reduce severity and reduce the period of time that you are contagious."
Marion Pepper, a professor of immunology at the University of Washington, told me that vaccines additionally reduced rates of a dangerous inflammatory disease seen in children, MIS-C. Marc Veldhoen, a professor of immunology at the University of Lisbon, pointed out to me that vaccines help reduce the incidence of long-term complications that can occur even from mild coronavirus infections.
We want to be sure, of course, that vaccines are safe, and thus far, the trials for under-5 vaccines have not raised any safety concerns. Plus, children who are 5 years and a month old aren't a different species than those who are 4 years and 10 months old -- and we have plenty of data points on the safety and the benefits of these vaccines since they were authorized for children over 5 just about six months ago.
So what should the F.D.A. do?
First, it should stop all the five-dimensional chess games that predict blowback due to perverse behavioral outcomes, and often do so without a sound social science basis. It's good that the officials consider vaccine confidence as a key issue as they try to navigate such a challenging time. However, those concerns should be based on a realistic understanding of how people are likely to actually behave, and the officials should prioritize empowering and informing people, rather than trying to guide behavior by withholding tools. There should especially be no room for pop psychology. Transparency is great, proper communication is essential, and, above all, providing tools that help protect children as soon as possible is crucial.
According to the C.D.C., through the end of February, record numbers of children were infected during the Omicron wave, and between Dec. 19 and Jan. 31, 572 children under 5 were hospitalized in 14 states. Similar trends most likely continued into March. Vaccination might have helped protect these children and, crucially, prevented many of these hospitalizations.
There is no logic for leaving the youngest children unprotected any longer. Vaccines save lives, reduce the incidence of unwanted outcomes and shorten the duration of illness and contagious periods, for everyone. The littlest among us deserve just as much protection, now.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .
(PHOTOGRAPH BY Rose Wong FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

____________________________________________________________