Document 343 of 566

I Cherish My Grief for the Mother I Never Expected to Have: [Op-Ed]: [Op-Ed]

https://www.proquest.com/newspapers/i-cherish-my-grief-mother-never-expected-have-op/docview/2660238627/se-2?accountid=14026

Abstract: None available.

Full text: I usually delete the Instagram app on my phone on Mother's Day. I already know what the posts will be: pictures of my friends as babies, sitting on their mothers' laps, photos of them toasting their mothers at brunch.
"Thanks so much to the best mom ever," they'll say. "You made me everything I am. You gave me everything I have." Very touching. And very stressful. Because as a motherless woman, what then do I not have that everyone else does?
I've lost two mothers now, and I don't need reminders of what they left me: love and absence, good grief and bad grief, grief that holds you and grief that strangles you.
My first mother gave me life, food, the knowledge of how to tie my shoes. But she also gave me complex post-traumatic stress disorder, a condition that arises from years of continual abuse. She struggled with a mysterious mental illness. Many days, I'd find her sobbing in her bedroom or raging at a teakettle. If I made the smallest mistake -- leaving a speck on a glass I washed, throwing my sweater on the floor -- she told me I was the cause of her anguish because I was worthless, ugly, unlovable. Then she would beat me, occasionally endangering my life. She threatened suicide and made at least one attempt that she later claimed was my fault. I believed her.
It was almost a relief when, in the summer after I finished eighth grade, my mother abandoned me and my father. In the summer between my junior and senior years of high school, my father followed suit -- he started a new family across town and left me the house. I completed high school alone.
If my parents had died, then I might've received fruit baskets. Lasagnas. Maybe someone would have actually come to take care of me. But with this loss, I had no time to grieve in the traditional sense. I buried all of my feelings except motivational fury and kept going, took my SATs and microwaved Costco chimichangas and drove myself to school every day. What choice did I have?
In young adulthood, I was ferociously independent: I dedicated myself to my career, saved money obsessively, gave myself pep talks after breakups. I didn't need a family, I told myself. Here I was, thriving on my own! When friends complained about their controlling, annoying parents, I counted myself lucky. There were advantages to being parentless.
Still, my mother's voice stayed with me. When I messed up at work -- uploaded the wrong file, forgot to call someone back -- there she was, whispering in my ear: Worthless girl. Idiot girl. You can't do anything right.
I tried my best to exorcise her, to discard everything about her, to hate the things she loved -- buttered-popcorn-flavored jelly beans and yellow roses. But when I stumbled upon photos of her, I realized I have her shoulders. Her hands. I am here, the voice whispered.
Perhaps it was this whispering that made me hold myself back from the sweet, mothering figures I encountered over the years. Always polite, I still kept a safe emotional distance from friends' mothers -- brought them chocolates and tea and a strained smile when I saw them. The voice lingered: These people don't care about you. You're unlovable.
Then, in my late 20s, I started dating Joey. Joey is a real Queens boy. The kind of man who pronounces human yoo-man and whose favorite food is eggplant parmigiana, which he ate with his mother in Ridgewood at least once a week. I first met Joey's mother, Margaret, at Christmas in 2016.
That year, she gave me a stack of presents that went up to my neck. Jewelry holders and salad bowls and sweaters and socks and mascara and moisturizer. Her generosity was so astounding that it made me feel awkward and guilty: How could I ever reciprocate? But that missed the point. She never wanted anything back. Her love was given freely, abundantly, without expectation or entitlement.
I started showing up to those weekly dinners, and Margaret was so full of warmth, every single time. When I finally had to explain to her why I was there for every holiday, every Mother's Day, Easter, Thanksgiving and Christmas -- because my own parents didn't want me -- she grabbed my hand and said, with tears in her eyes: "Forget them. You're ours now."
Margaret was always like that. She gave birth to four children, but she was a mother to so many more of us: gutter punks, orchestra kids, goths and geeks. Anyone who was struggling without their parents' love came to Margaret's house, and she made us all feel like hers, would feed us and give us her extra tablecloths and Chapsticks.
Eventually, I began calling her Mom. That word always felt strange coming out of my mouth. It felt loaded, freighted with abuse and resentment, and I think she could tell. "You can call me whatever you want," she'd remind me, gently. "You can call me Margaret, or Mom, or anything." But I said it anyway, my arms laden with gifts: "Thanks, Mom." And in those two words were all the things I wanted to say: "Thank you" and "You're healing me" and "I love you."
In the fall of 2019, just a couple of months after Joey and I got married, Margaret started falling, cracking her head on the counter, on the sidewalk. She went through a bevy of tests and found that she had multiple system atrophy, a neurodegenerative disease similar to Parkinson's. Shortly thereafter, in February of 2020, Joey and I moved into the apartment above her in Ridgewood to help care for her.
Then the pandemic hit, and we truly became each other's support system. I'd cook a couple of times a week, and we'd play hours of board games, her favorite form of entertainment. We knew the disease was taking hold when we started beating her at Bananagrams, a word game at which she had dominated. But she was never a sore loser. She always just wanted to play.
Margaret loved that we lived so close to her. She said it made her feel safer. But she didn't like that the balance was off now, that we had to take care of her more than the other way around. Even near the end, when it was difficult for her to stand, let alone peel potatoes, she'd still make pot roast for us. I'd tell her to stop, not to bother, I'd make it instead. But she watched me take a third helping and refused to listen.
Margaret passed away in April of 2021. She was the third parent I'd lost, although the other two are still alive. I thought that I understood what grief was, that I could handle it like a veteran. But the pain was so different. It gutted me.
That grief that strangles, versus the grief that holds -- I know the difference now. I didn't cry when my birth mother left, because my grief before was mostly made up of anger so ferocious that it just made me hate myself.
The grief I feel over the loss of Margaret levels me regularly; big floods of tears, suddenly, in the middle of the day. But at the same time, this grief is so much sweeter. Because I get to keep her. I get to miss her. The ways she took care of me, the things she taught me, the little ways that I wound up resembling her sometimes, even if she didn't raise me.
Margaret used to tell me, "You're so easy to love." Somehow, now, I believe her. Her voice is in my head now, too. She gets to stay.
Stephanie Foo (@imontheradio) is the author of "What My Bones Know: A Memoir of Healing From Complex Trauma." She's also a journalist and radio producer, formerly of "This American Life" and "Snap Judgment."
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .

____________________________________________________________