Document 340 of 566

What Moms Really Need: [Op-Ed]: [Op-Ed]

https://www.proquest.com/newspapers/what-moms-really-need-op-ed/docview/2660521113/se-2?accountid=14026

Abstract: None available.

Full text: To pass the time on a recent flight while my kids melted their brains with video games, I watched the classic 1980 movie "9 to 5." If you haven't seen it, or need a refresher, it's about three office workers played by Dolly Parton, Lily Tomlin and Jane Fonda navigating their brazenly sexist workplace and taking on their male chauvinist pig of a boss. In the end, they triumph, and establish a feminist fantasy of a supportive work environment, including flexible work schedules, on-site child care and a substance abuse rehabilitation program.
I'd spent the days leading up to that flight sifting through mail from readers, hundreds of them, who'd responded to a question from The Times: What would help them the most as parents in this moment? And what those parents wanted, in 2022, were the same things the heroines of "9 to 5" wanted more than four decades ago -- and which remain frustratingly out of reach. It's enough to drive you crazy if you let it.
For the past two years, I've been covering how parents, mothers in particular, have been primal screaming about how deeply our society has failed them. As the pandemic raged on, they were left to handle the bulk of child care and domestic duties while doing remote work and keeping an eye on Zoom school.
I know that it can feel as if all that screaming was into a void: At the beginning of this year, the expanded child tax credit, a crucial pandemic stopgap, ended; for many, child care is still unavailable or inconsistent, while paid parental leave for all on the federal level seems like a pipe dream.
Add in the news Roe vs. Wade appears to be on the verge of being tossed out -- which could mean that the fundamental right to choose when to become a mother in the first place could disappear -- and it really can feel that at best we're stuck in a rut. The gains American women have made in the past half-century can seem as if they're slipping away.
But without giving up, settling or putting on rose-colored glasses, we still have to keep the long view in mind, to reflect on the progress we've made in the past century and to acknowledge that mothers are central to the fight for women's rights.
We don't need to think back very far to recall a very different world.
Reporting for The Times in 1973, Marylin Bender (herself a newsroom trailblazer who once, when asking for a raise, was told: "You're married. You don't need it.") described a divorced mother from Michigan, Eddlene Bloom, who was asked for the names of her ex-husband and lawyer when she tried to open her own charge account at a department store.
Although she had plenty of assets and had managed the household bills while she was married, Ms. Bloom's credit rating remained with her former husband, making her "a nonperson when it comes to credit," as Representative Bella Abzug expressed it back then. It wasn't until 1974 that credit discrimination based on sex or marital status was outlawed at the federal level.
In 1975, The Times reported on an unmarried schoolteacher in Texas who, after becoming pregnant, was removed from her teaching job and reassigned to a librarian role. She sued for sex discrimination and lost, with a judge ruling that there was no evidence the district treated male teachers who become parents out of wedlock any differently from female teachers who did the same, despite acknowledging that "such evidence would normally not be available, since presumably male teachers do not reveal their fatherhood of children out of wedlock, and female teachers, at some time during their pregnancy, necessarily reveal their motherhood."
In 1978, Congress passed the Pregnancy Discrimination Act, making it illegal to fire or reassign an employee based on a pregnancy.
In her book "Career & Family: Women's Century-Long Journey Toward Equity," the Harvard University economist Claudia Goldin describes the 1970s as a period of particularly radical change, and what's happened in the past century as a "staggering historical shift." She writes: "Women are not just working; they have meaningful careers that many manage, or intend, to combine with a family in an equitable marriage. In all of world history, this has never happened before."
When I talked to her recently, Ms. Goldin, who has done decades of research on the female labor force and the earnings gender gap, said, "'Bargaining power' sounds very highfalutin," but mothers today have economic bargaining power that our grandmothers could only have dreamed of -- she particularly mentioned the increased educational attainment of women as one source of this power.
'A four-day workweek. It would help me catch my breath.'
-- Andrea Eboh, Dubuque, Iowa
In November, Ms. Goldin told me that she believes workers have more bargaining power in this tight labor market, and that "greedy jobs," those that are high salary but often have inflexible hours, are becoming less greedy, which could help ameliorate the persistent maternal pay gap.
That might look like a four-day workweek for some Americans. California's legislature is considering proposals to reduce the workweek to four days for companies with over 500 employees, according to Axios: "Though the legislation is a long shot, calls to shorten the workweek -- a perennial fantasy for cube dwellers, factory workers and others -- have grown louder and more prevalent since the pandemic showed us what's possible in terms of alternative job arrangements." What that might mean for parents is having the ability to manage their work lives and their home lives with less risk of burnout.
'A federal paid leave program -- including both parental and sick leave.'
-- Lee Taylor-Penn, Alexandria, Va.
In April, Maryland and Delaware became the 10th and 11th states to pass paid family leave laws. The District of Columbia also has a paid leave law on the books. According to the Bipartisan Policy Center, 11 more state legislatures have introduced paid leave bills.
Though the states that have passed such laws are Democratic, legislators in red states such as Oklahoma, Tennessee and West Virginia have introduced bills. And at the federal level, a significant advance took place when President Donald Trump signed a law in 2019 providing 12 weeks of paid parental leave for civilian federal employees.
Leading up to the 2020 election, some Republican legislators talked up family leave in a bid to win the votes of suburban women in swing states. It's the beginning of a deeper recognition, including by conservatives, that this is a problem that the government can and should solve.
'Free or low-cost reliable child care.'
-- Laurel LeFebvre, New York City
Meanwhile, according to Child Care Aware of America, an advocacy group, the price of center-based child care for an infant "exceeds the cost of housing" in the Midwest, Northeast and South. In those three regions and the West, the price of child care exceeds tuition at a four-year public university.
Although an injection of $ 39 billion from President Biden's American Rescue Plan helped keep the child care system afloat during the pandemic, many parents struggle to find and pay for high-quality care. "It was a crisis before, and it is a bigger crisis now," said Andrea Paluso, a co-executive director of the Child Care for Every Family Network, a network of local and national groups working for a more complete child care system in America.
But if there's a silver lining to the child care disaster of 2020-2022 it's that it has raised awareness among parents and energy among activists. Melissa Boteach, the vice president for income security and child care at the National Women's Law Center, said that before the pandemic, mothers she spoke to would blame themselves for not being able to afford or find good child care. But the pandemic "accelerated years of work of conceptualizing child care as the backbone of the economy," she said.
"I do think because of Covid there are more elected officials who are aware of the scale of the crisis they had allowed to be invisible to them previously," Ms. Paluso said.
'Better financial support for early childhood education and educators.'
-- Kerri Hauman, Lexington, Ky.
Erica Gallegos, also a co-executive director of the Child Care for Every Family Network, said there is now bipartisan support for more child care financing, and that even some of the more conservative legislators she speaks to understand the need to raise child care provider pay (over 94 percent of child care workers are women). One of the major issues in child care is staff retention, because the pay is often so low, and the District of Columbia for instance, has passed a law to send a one-time payment of $ 10,000- $ 14,000 to child care workers.
Incremental change will not fix all the issues in child care -- all the experts I have ever spoken to agree that only a long-term federal investment will do that -- because providing high-quality care and retaining experienced caregivers is costly. And while so many inequities remain for parents overall, the pandemic has been especially difficult for mothers without a college degree, and for Black and Hispanic mothers, according to an economic review from the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
But without being Pollyannaish about it, women like Ms. Paluso and Ms. Gallegos give me hope for the future, and in turn, they are inspired by the parents and child care providers that they work with to organize on the ground. "They understand what the problem is, and it's not them," said Ms. Gallegos. No one ever bothered before to build a sturdy child care system because we've just depended on mothers to do that work for free. Now they're building it themselves.
And that's ultimately what gives me hope, even against a backdrop of bad news: A generation ago, the rollback of legal gender discrimination didn't appear out of thin air. Things haven't always moved in a straight line. Things happen because coalitions of activists fought for years. For example, Marylin Bender's 1973 article about women denied credit mentions work done by chapters of the National Organization for Women, the Center for Women Policy Studies and women's groups in Dallas, Minneapolis and St. Paul and Baltimore.
The ruling in Roe came after years of mass movement. As the historian Leslie Reagan notes in her book "When Abortion Was a Crime," "The stunning transformation in law and public policy regarding abortion and women's rights was rooted in the declining conditions of abortion under the criminal law and built on generations of women demanding abortions -- and getting them."
In the early '70s, before Roe became law, an underground network in Chicago called the Jane Collective helped women get illegal abortions. Martha Scott, who was a stay-at-home mom of four young children back then, told WBEZ that she was moved to volunteer with Jane because "I just thought, if you really care about something, you have to act on it." This past week, we have seen so many people, including mothers and their children, taking to the streets to continue to demand the right to control their own bodies.
The burden shouldn't fall only on those most affected to fix what's broken, but I know that American mothers will continue to show up and fight. And on this Mother's Day, I'm grateful for the generations of mothers who fought before us, doing the sometimes painfully slow work of advocacy, and for the ones fighting in this moment, too.
Jessica Grose is the author of a Times Opinion newsletter on parenting.
(PHOTOGRAPHS VIA GETTY)

____________________________________________________________